README.md, before:

# Akowe Financial Tracker

Akowe is a financial tracking application built to help with business expense and income management for tax preparation.

## Features

- Import income and expense data from CSV files
- Track and categorize business expenses
- Upload and manage receipts for expenses using Azure Blob Storage
- Record client income with project tracking
- Time tracking with timesheet system
- Invoice generation from timesheet entries
- Generate financial reports and summaries
- Prepare data for tax season with Canadian tax support
- AI-powered tax category suggestions and optimization
- User authentication and authorization
- Admin portal for user management

## Development Setup

1. Clone the repository
2. Create a virtual environment: `python -m venv venv`
3. Activate the virtual environment:
   - Windows: `venv\Scripts\activate`
   - Mac/Linux: `source venv/bin/activate`
4. Install dependencies: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
5. Initialize the database:
   ```
   flask db init
   flask db migrate -m "Initial migration"
   flask db upgrade
   ```
6. Create an admin user: `python create_admin.py`
7. Run the application: `flask run` or `python app.py`

## Using Make

The project includes a Makefile with common tasks:

```bash
make install  # Install dependencies
make setup    # Initialize the database
make run      # Run the application
make test     # Run tests
make lint     # Run linting (flake8)
make format   # Format code (black)
make check    # Run lint and tests
make clean    # Clean up build artifacts
```

## Testing

Run the test suite:

```bash
pytest
```

For coverage report:

```bash
pytest --cov=akowe
```

## Code Quality

We use the following tools to maintain code quality:

- **black** for code formatting
- **flake8** for linting
- **mypy** for type checking

Run all checks:

```bash
make check
```

## Production Deployment with Docker

Akowe can be easily deployed to production using Docker and Docker Compose with optimized multi-stage builds.

### Prerequisites

- Docker and Docker Compose V2 installed
- CSV data files (optional) placed in the `data/` directory

### Development Configuration

1. Copy the example environment file: `cp .env.example .env`
2. Edit the `.env` file with your settings (especially update the SECRET_KEY and passwords)

### Development Deployment

1. Build and start the services including PgAdmin:
   ```
   docker compose up -d
   ```

2. The application will be available at http://localhost:5000

3. PgAdmin (database management) will be available at http://localhost:5050

### Production Deployment

For production environments, use the production-specific configuration:

1. Create a production environment file:
   ```
   cp .env.production.example .env.production
   ```

2. Edit `.env.production` with secure passwords and configuration values

3. Build and deploy using the production compose file:
   ```
   docker compose -f docker-compose.prod.yml up -d
   ```

4. For a secure production setup, consider:
   - Using a reverse proxy (Nginx, Traefik) with HTTPS
   - Setting up monitoring and log aggregation
   - Configuring backups for database volumes
   - Using Docker Swarm or Kubernetes for orchestration

### Scaling in Production

The production docker-compose file supports horizontal scaling:

```bash
# Scale up web services to 4 instances
WEB_REPLICAS=4 docker compose -f docker-compose.prod.yml up -d
```

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Description | Default |
|----------|-------------|---------|
| FLASK_APP | Flask application entry point | app.py |
| FLASK_ENV | Flask environment | production |
| SECRET_KEY | Flask secret key for session security | - |
| DB_USER | PostgreSQL username | akowe_user |
| DB_PASSWORD | PostgreSQL password | akowe_password |
| DB_HOST | PostgreSQL hostname | postgres |
| DB_PORT | PostgreSQL port | 5432 |
| DB_NAME | PostgreSQL database name | akowe |
| ADMIN_USERNAME | Initial admin username | admin |
| ADMIN_EMAIL | Initial admin email | admin@example.com |
| ADMIN_PASSWORD | Initial admin password | - |
| ADMIN_FIRST_NAME | Initial admin first name | Admin |
| ADMIN_LAST_NAME | Initial admin last name | User |
| AZURE_STORAGE_CONNECTION_STRING | Azure Blob Storage connection string | - |
| COMPANY_NAME | Your company name (used on invoices) | Akowe |
| DEFAULT_HOURLY_RATE | Default hourly rate for timesheet entries | 120.00 |

## Kubernetes Deployment

For Kubernetes deployment, see the [k8s directory](./k8s/README.md).

When deploying to Kubernetes, be sure to run the migration job before deploying the application to ensure the database schema is updated correctly for the timesheet and invoice features. The migration job is defined in `k8s/migrate-job.yaml`.

## Receipt Upload

Akowe now supports uploading and managing receipts for expense records. See the [detailed documentation](./docs/receipts.md) for setup and usage.

## Timesheet System

Track billable hours and generate invoices with the timesheet system. See the [timesheet documentation](./docs/timesheet.md) for usage details.

## Invoice System

Create professional invoices from timesheet entries. See the [invoice documentation](./docs/invoice.md) for setup and workflow information.

## AI-Powered Tax Features

Akowe includes comprehensive AI-powered tax features to optimize your tax position:

### 1. Smart Tax Categorization

- **Smart Tax Category Recommendations**: Get intelligent suggestions for expense categories based on title and vendor information
- **Tax Implications Analysis**: View CRA tax category mapping, deduction rates, and special tax rules for each expense category
- **Expense Analysis Dashboard**: Access the AI Tax Analysis page to identify potential tax optimization opportunities
- **Missing Receipt Detection**: Automatically identify expenses over $100 missing receipts that could be problematic during audits
- **Tax Optimization Suggestions**: Get personalized recommendations to maximize deductions

Access these features:
- From the expense list page, click the "AI Tax Analysis" button in the top toolbar
- When creating or editing an expense, use the "Get AI Category Suggestions" button 
- Visit `/expense/analyze-expenses` directly to see the full analysis dashboard

### 2. AI Tax Planning & Prediction

- **Income & Expense Projections**: Get year-end projections based on current data
- **Tax Bracket Analysis**: See which federal tax bracket you're in and how close you are to the next one
- **Monthly Breakdown**: View month-by-month income and expense projections
- **Strategic Tax Planning**: Receive timely suggestions for tax optimization strategies
- **Effective Tax Rate Calculation**: Understand your real tax burden percentage

Access these features:
- From the tax dashboard, click the "AI Tax Planning" button (only available for current year)
- Visit `/tax/prediction` directly to see the full planning dashboard

## Mobile API

Akowe includes a comprehensive REST API that can be used to build mobile applications or integrate with other systems. See the [API documentation](./docs/api.md) for details.

## CSV Import Format

### Income CSV Format
```
date,amount,client,project,invoice
2025-03-21,9040.00,SearchLabs (RAVL),P2025001 - Interac Konek,Invoice #INV-202503-0002 - SearchLabs
```

### Expense CSV Format
```
date,title,amount,category,payment_method,status,vendor
2025-04-12,WD Red Plus 12TB NAS Hard Disk Drive,386.37,hardware,credit_card,pending,Newegg
```

## Backup and Restore

### Backup
```
docker exec -t akowe-postgres pg_dumpall -c -U akowe_user > backup/backup_$(date +%Y-%m-%d_%H-%M-%S).sql
```

### Restore
```
cat backup/your_backup_file.sql | docker exec -i akowe-postgres psql -U akowe_user -d akowe
```

Commit message:

Add consolidated migration script and tests for timezone utilities
- Implemented a comprehensive migration script to handle database schema changes, including adding `last_login` to the `users` table and `user_id` to the `expense` table.
- Created unit tests for automatic income generation when invoices are marked as paid, ensuring no duplicate income records are created.
- Developed tests for timezone utilities, including conversion functions and date formatting.
- Added integration tests for timezone handling in API endpoints, verifying correct timezone initialization and datetime conversions.

README.md, after:

# Akowe Financial Tracker

Akowe is a financial tracking application built to help with business expense and income management for tax preparation.

## Features

- Import income and expense data from CSV files
- Track and categorize business expenses
- Upload and manage receipts for expenses using Azure Blob Storage
- Record client income with project tracking
- Time tracking with timesheet system
- Invoice generation from timesheet entries
- Generate financial reports and summaries
- Prepare data for tax season with Canadian tax support
- AI-powered tax category suggestions and optimization
- User authentication and authorization
- Admin portal for user management

## Development Setup

1. Clone the repository
2. Create a virtual environment: `python -m venv venv`
3. Activate the virtual environment:
   - Windows: `venv\Scripts\activate`
   - Mac/Linux: `source venv/bin/activate`
4. Install dependencies: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
5. Initialize the database:
   ```
   flask db init
   flask db migrate -m "Initial migration"
   flask db upgrade
   ```
6. Create an admin user: `python create_admin.py`
7. Run the application: `flask run` or `python app.py`

## Using Make

The project includes a Makefile with common tasks:

```bash
make install  # Install dependencies
make setup    # Initialize the database
make run      # Run the application
make test     # Run tests
make lint     # Run linting (flake8)
make format   # Format code (black)
make check    # Run lint and tests
make clean    # Clean up build artifacts
```

## Testing

Run the test suite:

```bash
pytest
```

For coverage report:

```bash
pytest --cov=akowe
```

## Code Quality

We use the following tools to maintain code quality:

- **black** for code formatting
- **flake8** for linting
- **mypy** for type checking

Run all checks:

```bash
make check
```

## Production Deployment with Docker

Akowe can be easily deployed to production using Docker and Docker Compose with optimized multi-stage builds.

### Prerequisites

- Docker and Docker Compose V2 installed
- CSV data files (optional) placed in the `data/` directory

### Development Configuration

1. Copy the example environment file: `cp .env.example .env`
2. Edit the `.env` file with your settings (especially update the SECRET_KEY and passwords)

### Development Deployment

1. Build and start the services including PgAdmin:
   ```
   docker compose up -d
   ```

2. The application will be available at http://localhost:5000

3. PgAdmin (database management) will be available at http://localhost:5050

### Production Deployment

For production environments, use the production-specific configuration:

1. Create a production environment file:
   ```
   cp .env.production.example .env.production
   ```

2. Edit `.env.production` with secure passwords and configuration values

3. Build and deploy using the production compose file:
   ```
   docker compose -f docker-compose.prod.yml up -d
   ```

4. For a secure production setup, consider:
   - Using a reverse proxy (Nginx, Traefik) with HTTPS
   - Setting up monitoring and log aggregation
   - Configuring backups for database volumes
   - Using Docker Swarm or Kubernetes for orchestration

### Scaling in Production

The production docker-compose file supports horizontal scaling:

```bash
# Scale up web services to 4 instances
WEB_REPLICAS=4 docker compose -f docker-compose.prod.yml up -d
```

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Description | Default |
|----------|-------------|---------|
| FLASK_APP | Flask application entry point | app.py |
| FLASK_ENV | Flask environment | production |
| SECRET_KEY | Flask secret key for session security | - |
| DB_USER | PostgreSQL username | akowe_user |
| DB_PASSWORD | PostgreSQL password | akowe_password |
| DB_HOST | PostgreSQL hostname | postgres |
| DB_PORT | PostgreSQL port | 5432 |
| DB_NAME | PostgreSQL database name | akowe |
| ADMIN_USERNAME | Initial admin username | admin |
| ADMIN_EMAIL | Initial admin email | admin@example.com |
| ADMIN_PASSWORD | Initial admin password | - |
| ADMIN_FIRST_NAME | Initial admin first name | Admin |
| ADMIN_LAST_NAME | Initial admin last name | User |
| AZURE_STORAGE_CONNECTION_STRING | Azure Blob Storage connection string | - |
| COMPANY_NAME | Your company name (used on invoices) | Akowe |
| DEFAULT_HOURLY_RATE | Default hourly rate for timesheet entries | 120.00 |

## Kubernetes Deployment

For Kubernetes deployment, see the [k8s directory](./k8s/README.md).

When deploying to Kubernetes, be sure to run the consolidated migration job before deploying the application to ensure the database schema is updated correctly. See the [Database Migrations Guide](k8s/DATABASE-MIGRATIONS.md) for detailed instructions. The migration job is defined in `k8s/migrations-job.yaml`.

## Receipt Upload

Akowe now supports uploading and managing receipts for expense records. See the [detailed documentation](./docs/receipts.md) for setup and usage.

## Timesheet System

Track billable hours and generate invoices with the timesheet system. See the [timesheet documentation](./docs/timesheet.md) for usage details.

## Invoice System

Create professional invoices from timesheet entries. See the [invoice documentation](./docs/invoice.md) for setup and workflow information.

## AI-Powered Tax Features

Akowe includes comprehensive AI-powered tax features to optimize your tax position:

### 1. Smart Tax Categorization

- **Smart Tax Category Recommendations**: Get intelligent suggestions for expense categories based on title and vendor information
- **Tax Implications Analysis**: View CRA tax category mapping, deduction rates, and special tax rules for each expense category
- **Expense Analysis Dashboard**: Access the AI Tax Analysis page to identify potential tax optimization opportunities
- **Missing Receipt Detection**: Automatically identify expenses over $100 missing receipts that could be problematic during audits
- **Tax Optimization Suggestions**: Get personalized recommendations to maximize deductions

Access these features:
- From the expense list page, click the "AI Tax Analysis" button in the top toolbar
- When creating or editing an expense, use the "Get AI Category Suggestions" button 
- Visit `/expense/analyze-expenses` directly to see the full analysis dashboard

### 2. AI Tax Planning & Prediction

- **Income & Expense Projections**: Get year-end projections based on current data
- **Tax Bracket Analysis**: See which federal tax bracket you're in and how close you are to the next one
- **Monthly Breakdown**: View month-by-month income and expense projections
- **Strategic Tax Planning**: Receive timely suggestions for tax optimization strategies
- **Effective Tax Rate Calculation**: Understand your real tax burden percentage

Access these features:
- From the tax dashboard, click the "AI Tax Planning" button (only available for current year)
- Visit `/tax/prediction` directly to see the full planning dashboard

## Mobile API

Akowe includes a comprehensive REST API that can be used to build mobile applications or integrate with other systems. See the [API documentation](./docs/api.md) for details.

## CSV Import Format

### Income CSV Format
```
date,amount,client,project,invoice
2025-03-21,9040.00,SearchLabs (RAVL),P2025001 - Interac Konek,Invoice #INV-202503-0002 - SearchLabs
```

### Expense CSV Format
```
date,title,amount,category,payment_method,status,vendor
2025-04-12,WD Red Plus 12TB NAS Hard Disk Drive,386.37,hardware,credit_card,pending,Newegg
```

## Backup and Restore

### Backup
```
docker exec -t akowe-postgres pg_dumpall -c -U akowe_user > backup/backup_$(date +%Y-%m-%d_%H-%M-%S).sql
```

### Restore
```
cat backup/your_backup_file.sql | docker exec -i akowe-postgres psql -U akowe_user -d akowe
```
